that looks like the thumbs up to me all
righty everyone I'm sorry to interrupt
your conversations this is our last
artist Talk of the day um and I'm so so
excited to have tun Choy here with us in
San Francisco for the first time here at
Great
area oh and here I go getting excited
and not waiting for our interpreter I
that's my bad I'm just a very excitable
person uh and that last panel really
fired me
up tun Choy um explores the politics the
Poetics of science technology and human
relations he works with computer
programming drawing and writing
oftentimes in collaboration with fellow
artists experts and community members
and most recently he collaborated with
Christine's son Kim on lecture
performances about sound and Technology
a fun fact uh one of Christine's son
Kim's works is on view as part of the de
Club VR experience over back there so
definitely check that one out too he
collaborated with Nabil Hussein and
Sonia board to create the code ecologies
conference about the environmental
impact of technology and organized the
first New York Tech Zen fair with Mimi
onuoha who is also represented in our
exhibition on the standing screen um in
the back over there uh I won't say too
much more I'll let tun speak for himself
enjoy
everyone
thank you so much for having me um I I
want to start by just appreciating all
of you being here all of the gray area
and the community coming out I want to
say just a word um of acknowledgement um
and appreciation for net dcker who was
supposed to give a presentation earlier
but um you know they decided to not
present um honoring the free Palestine
and and call for strike so I um super
thankful for that and um I decided to
hold the presentation because it's very
valuable for me to share this work that
I do and with the community and that is
a way for me to continue to support
freedom of people around the
world so n thank you for your support
yeah
yeah in in the next 20 30 minutes um I
would like to share two stories
essentially the one is about the web and
the other is about a space that I am
creating in Soul South
Korea first I'll talk about the web um
there's a version of this drawing in the
in the gallery which um I'm very
thankful to have shown the drawing is a
illustration of people dancing creating
webs with their movements strings and
other kinds of uh objects the lettering
says distribution instead of
decentralization that's one of the first
word on the graphic and we can get into
the details the technical details of the
differences between the two but I'm more
interested in the political
interpretation of a distribution and
decentralization so to me distribution
is more of equ
more of a sharing and decentralization
is more of a
delegation for me computer is about
control of different spaces information
and time control is the mechanics of how
computers are used to you know utilize
multiple work and longdistance
communication and such but I I also
think care is
important and in the graphic It also
says information instead of data I mean
data is information and information is
data in this case I was thinking about
information as a continuous signal and
data as more discrete forms of uh
encapsulation of the
information so I know that some of you
are very technical folks and also
artistic folks but I do want to talk
about defining these terms in a more of
an artistic context so what is network
network is a physical infrastructure for
communication over distance it's like uh
a string that connects two
people I've been thinking a lot about
colonialism uh in the context of Art and
Technology um for the last five years
I've been thinking about it because I
think that is the missing answer to some
of the questions that I had about why
are the Technologies the way they are
and the short answer is that that
colonialism was a tech project um this
famous painting by um you know John Gast
the American progress it shows like this
idealistic white woman as you know this
Spirit of uh North America to manifest
destiny kind of walking very peacefully
to the
West I'm particularly interested in this
a aspect of the drawing which shows
these Telegram networks along with the
railroad you know it was always a
mechanical um it was always a system for
control of information and control of
people so colonialism slavery and kind
of a global trade at large was always in
tandem with computer code and
electronics as we think a lot about
what's happening in Gaza and other
places and
um as we are thinking about different
forms of Oppression that exist in our
society and elsewhere I I do want to
recommend this particular book that I'm
reading now unworthy Republic which is
about the how essentially the United
States stole Land from the indigenous
people and displaced them erased them
and made them into
Extinction and how they use legal
structures and financial instruments to
re uh realize that this particular boot
does not talk a lot about computer code
or the early forms of coding um in that
relations but I am personally interested
in the relationship between accounting
different kinds of bookkeeping and
automations that existed you know from
the colonial time to
today so what is an internet internet is
a network of networks it's just when the
computers are talking to another
computers I'm sure you all seen these
photos but um I do want to make make a
note of like how underseas cable for the
internet um are mapped and also how the
trade and slave routes are mapped in a
similar ways there's a just practical
geographical reason for this kind of a
um parallel but there's also political
and economic reasons for their
similarities I've been thinking a lot
about waste especially e-w and um you
know where they go and also I've been
thinking about rechargeable batteries
and um you know kind of the rare Earth
mineral that are extracted most most
times from Africa that are exported and
made into these Tesla batteries and
Hyundai batteries and such and how that
essentially is replicating this circular
motion of uh displacement and
waste so we see a lot of problems in the
world and we think it's like the problem
of capitalism or some evil force but
it's actually still ongoing colonialist
project so what is colonialism it's just
control by one power over another area
and people it's a eras of or culture
exploitation and
displacement so here's a book cover of a
France fanon's book uh black skin white
masks in English and Korean and I bring
up Fon just for a moment because I he
focuses on this notion of of
compartmentalization that I think is the
key the compartmentalization a
separation between the colonial
colonizing people and then the colonized
and even within the colonized so this
aspects of discrete separation of one
group to another and thinking of us as
two different types of people opposing
each other is essentially the core of
how the
compartmentalization
works so worldwide web is essentially A
system that exists on top of the
Internet it's the way that people
communicate with each
other this is um this is pre pandemic uh
San Francisco about two miles from here
at San Francisco mint um I was really
lucky to be part of the um decentralized
web Summit and which was this initiative
by the internet archive to bring
together young and old emerging and also
established and you know Western and
also kind of Glo from the global South
different practitioners thinking about
decentralized in the web I was invited
to you know make this opening
performance which was very fun it was it
was one of those cases of like really
weird mix of a Tech conference and also
like very Arts conference at the same
time and also people who are not open to
Artistic ideas as well but um anyway we
made this immersive performances using
strings physical strings to create
different kinds of web I wrote about
this experience at the theme Journal
that led to a few of other projects that
I've worked on such as this lecture
performance at the Whitney Museum um
which invited some of my friends and
colleagues and students um especially
from the school for poetic computation
which was a artist run school that I
helped start and worked on until two
years
ago and we did a few things that made
this ideas and conversation about
internet more engaging and I I must say
that this was only possible because of
the amazing accessibility team at the
Whitney Museum um who not only helped
with interpretation and Mobility but
they really invited the community in and
they made the piece complete so we had
different access features such as what
we have today different languages
interpretations but also we had like um
you know blind folks we had deaf folks
and we had different people with
different disabilities that we did
didn't really we weren't able to uh
identify in
advance so it was a collaborative
process in which the participants and
then accessibility coordinators and our
stewards made
together there we explore different
kinds of a protocol um using you know
decentralized code to make essentially a
garden animated Garden where the
audience could log in with their
smartphone and it was a offline internet
so it wasn't connected to the fiber
optics it was a local first internet and
they cultivated these creatures on the
garden I went on to make other versions
of these Works um this was more of a
generative model where you know
different creatures existed also taking
information from the natural habitat
just sending you know humidity and
different kinds of sensors also thinking
about making these more kind of concrete
as a stand alone sculpture that exists
with a solar powered
system so this is rather technical work
and um I am interested in these kind of
technical works because I think they
open up different ways that social
network could be but um I I actually
think educational and performance and
Community engagement is equally
important or possibly
more of a friend of ours who was um
mentioned a few times already Christine
son Kim is a sound artist she she
identifies as a deaf person with capital
d uh she was born profoundly deaf she
uses American Sign
Language and um she was actually the
first person who gave me the courage to
work with and work for the disability
Community many years
ago this is just some of her drawings
because I think it gives you a sense of
what she does these are illustration of
American sign language that are made
into giant wall
paintings moving on um I worked with
different communities in Asia so this is
in Hong Kong um at a school for the
blind students so taking these similar
ideas about network and infrastructure
and trying to make them tactile and
accessible so this famous diagram of
different kinds of network I made it
into garment with help from the center
for Heritage arts and textile which the
mus in Hong Kong and we had them like
fited for the students and teachers so
they could actually you know wear it and
have fun and they also made their own
versions of a different network
diagram yeah it was it was interesting
um they they spent a lot of time with
their phone and um they talk to their
friends online and because they are
based in Hong Kong you know they
sometimes travel to Mainland China and
they have to use different VPN services
and some of those are accessible for the
blind folks and not a lot of them are so
we are just really navigating how they
use the internet to navigate the
physical world and different political
spaces I brought the work to Soul South
Korea which is my home
and here's just the image of doing more
workshops with
kids and those drawings being made into
public U
artworks so many of these dots are
captured on this blog called distrib Ed
web of care and it is on the worldwide
web like the real web and then also the
decentralized web um it's just a Blog
that I write for myself and also invite
friends to
contribute and this thoughts about
accessibility have been made into essays
at the creative independent and other
places just thinking about like actually
sharing these experiences working with
different disability
groups and some things that still bother
me is is that every other year we you
see this news about like you know new
technology now it's like AI that is like
used to interpret sign language for you
know um hearing people and a lot of
these times they don't actually
understand how sign language works and
they don't understand that de people
have different needs so every time these
in Innovations pop up I think that
people are quite upset so I wrote about
these kind of expectations of
able-bodied people for certain
technology to solve a problem of the
others if you are a coder or like Tech
artist and like want to make things
accessible SVG is awesome so SVG is just
like a very low-level way of coding
graphics with text only um my friends
who are blind have been just working on
it and oh my God it's just so liberating
and it's very low barrier for everyone
so it's not like the hottest new
platform or smart whatever but it will
be accessible meaning that they could
code something that could be made into
laser cut or 3D they could touch it and
it's it's very unexplored territory so I
recommend you to explore that and Marcos
uh is based in San Francisco he he has a
Blog called Blind
SVG so that's just first part of the web
story and the second part I have about
10 minutes is that this gallery that I'm
making in sou South Korea so the Galler
is called
Forever the logo is based on um weeing
pattern yeah a couple of things happened
in my life um during the pandemic that
made me rethink about what I do with the
rest of my life and I was like I I think
I want to do something that I will do
for the rest of my life and I wanted to
have a longer term plan and share that
with other people I was living in New
York City before that so you know I was
always busy and kind of tired and I
moved to Korea and I was thinking about
different ways of reestablishing
practice so I was like huh I would like
to make a art space that lasts forever
even after I die I would like it to be
something that sort of is beyond any of
us so I chose a spot um this is the area
that I found a space from 1897 uh to
1967 there's a lot of developments
obviously this is the area is actually
called Independence gate
area and this is what it looks like
now initially I was like what is my
wildest dream I was like let's have a
few galleries let's have a movie theater
let's have a parking lot so people could
park their cars and I was like I was
just going on and perhaps I was just
replicating what I thought is a
successful Art Space which is MOMA or
Whitney or whatnot and thinking that is
needed for the organizations to last for
a long time but these models of
Institutions are pretty much built on
this capitalist growth and expansion and
it's not sustainable you know they even
those large places are struggling to
keep things
going so I was like hm I should really
rethink what the Art Space needs to be
and here are a few things that I was
thinking about and so contemporary are
spaces that Champions racial Justice
which is not wheelchair
accessible yeah scratching our head
right and the kind of related to the
last panel famous technal music venue
like berkine that has been a spa safe
space for local queer and youth
Community but is not accessible or
accommodating or three is a prestigious
University that offers scholarships to
marginalized students but do not have
any disabled faculty
member so these three types of spaces
actually share this common modes of
exclusion where they they value certain
kinds of identity over the other and yes
it is important to have focus and you
can't accommodate everybody but there's
always this uncomfortable thing that are
hidden behind this very um provocative
and radical mission statements that they
have
and often times they say they don't have
the money to make a elevator or whatnot
and especially for DIY spaces that is
true but also I'm less concerned about
the elevator for all the DIY art spaces
I think there are ways to make their
programs and exhibitions accessible even
without elevators they could have a
popup
Elsewhere on the other
hand accessible art spat in a city that
is not
accessible how about like uh you know
having an event with sign language
interpreters but there's no one who
needs the sign language interpretation
so we've also seen these kind of um
examples of having access features but
not the
community so physical space is important
but invitations are much more
important and representations do matter
but the lived experiences of people are
more important
so I say this from a South Korean
perspective where we have this unpar
paralleled like kind of like heaven of
disability Arts these days there's so
much support for uh access arts and um
univer I I'll say like um trying to find
the right translation but um inclusive
Arts um so those are different
disability arts and inclusive
Arts um so the government and cities are
just pouring money into making these fan
see museums for dis disability arts and
this closure is that like I do work with
them and I support them and I want them
to do better but um there's this
contradiction of like the city and the
state actually cutting funding for the
essential human rights and Mobility
rights of the disability community so
it's just a textbook example of
disability washing such as like a green
washing
is
so access washing is the word that I
wanted to
use access washing is a way for the
people in the power to gain the
narrative about the inclusivity of a
certain Society through
arts and I think it actually
perpetuates um discrimination of the
marginalized Community such as this
activist who has been fighting for is
say just to get on a bus like they still
don't have accessible bus in most parts
of the world and he gets you know shut
down by the
government and just a lived the
experience of me and my friends uh Kim
Juan who's a painter who I invited to
give a talk at a museum that was like
inclusive and had elevators and such but
the subway broke down no one offered to
help the exsr right didn't come so he
was late and really struggled to
participate in this inclusive
event so I'm not interested in like
access as like a branding or political
ideology I'm just interested in Access
as a mode of creativity and modes of a
um being that we can share with
people so I started looking for a space
I found a beautiful space um here's a
friend of mine who I was looking the
spaces with a chang Min who also runs
another
Gallery so this was great but it was not
fully accessible we had to go through a
few steps so we I actually got the space
underneath that space that is
underground
floor and I still have barriers so it's
not a barrier-free space we have about
three Ines of Gap from the ground level
so we are building ramps and making
accessible features but I wouldn't say
this is a barrier free
space here was the design for the
space we started building and ran into
all sorts of problems as you do of
construction and had to modify a lot of
designs and you know some of the
features are not as accessible as I
wanted to be such as the restroom is not
fully
accessible but this is self-funded
project and that was important to for me
to be not dependent on corporate or
government funding so I'm just working
with what I have and with the community
that I have access to so this this a
space as of last week it's a 500 square
ft um the rent is about $700 us per
month so it's just it's a very small
space but we started programming with uh
you know residencies and workshops and
we're planning to have more performances
with disabled artists and also
non-disabled artists dancers painters
poets one of that is like access is a
forever Workshop which I'm very excited
about which is a collaboration between
skateboarder dancer and a wheelchair uh
performer and I'm really inspired by my
community in Korea Wong Kim is a writer
and a human rights lawyer but he's also
a dancer so I guess we are just
intersecting these legal policies and
creative
spaces and other DIY spaces in Asia like
a arrow Factory which was a small
storefront in Beijing that closed
recently but their impact
persists so just wrapping up um I talked
about internet and different kind of
tech projects that I've been doing I
also talked about more recent curatorial
work that I'm doing in
Korea and lastly it's just an invitation
especially for you all in you know
disability Arts as artist or Allies or
curators to think about ways we could
work together um either online or in
person in Soul or in other places
because I'm less interested in this
monolithic you know building with
parking lots and movie theaters art
institutions I'm more interested in like
small storefronts everywhere that are
just connected and I think that is the
way to have a decentralized and
distributed web become physical and to
for that to become
meaningful so small bookstores cafes
that are accessible I think those are
radical places to begin so I think art
is forever I think Community is forever
I think small is forever and I think
access is
forever thank
[Applause]
you
anybody have a question for
T from the
audience what's the
uh what's the status on your space how
long's it you know how what's next on
that and
uh how can we help things like that you
know the lease is for two years and um I
think we'll keep it for as long as we
can because we are it's one of those
situations we where we locked out right
next to a gentrifying neighborhood so I
guess we haven't really seen the rent
price go up but I'm I'm attached to the
space but I'm also not I think the idea
is more important if we have to move at
some point I think that will be okay um
the ways that other people in the Bay
Area or United States or North America
could be part of it is that I think just
exchange of of artists and ideas and
sharing there I guess also like thinking
about like different ways of sharing Art
Online that is not so much of Instagram
or nft space but something still
decentralized and meaningful I I don't
know the answer for
that um I'm also curious about because
you've done a lot with education right I
don't know if I guess you didn't talk
about it in your talk but uh tun was one
of the founders of school for poetic
computation in New York who we we worked
with um just wondering if you can in
your work with education how you know I
don't know if there are any thoughts
about how your accessibility work has um
intersected with that at all
or yeah yeah I mean I was so lucky to be
part of the school for I guess eight
years um and now I work at more
traditional universities so I was at
like um you know a private university in
Korea and I'm like teaching at a
University of Denver for a year now so I
travel back and forth so oh my like the
traditional universities are very
different and um but I do think we need
to make them more fun and inviting and
inclusive I I have like just daily
struggle of making my classes inclusive
and accessible like it is hard for
people who learn differently people who
speak differently
so and I was in a like very in the kind
of artistic space of a school for potic
computation where we had a freedom to
design how the code of conduct works or
like how we teach our classes but in
Unis you can't really do that you know
you have to grade them you have to take
attendances in a very standardized way
and thinking about access and
inclusivity in that context has been
very challenging for me because I I need
to be fair but also need to make classes
accessible thanks so much for being here
really appreciate
it